Deploying a Simple Application with Render
Learn how to deploy your first web service application using Render!

Introduction
In today’s fast-paced digital landscape, it’s crucial to have reliable and efficient deployment processes for applications. With popular Platform as a Service (PaaS) products like Render, we can set up and launch our applications to end-users quickly and efficiently.

In this tutorial, we will practice deploying a simple application using Render and go over:

Forking a sample Render code repository on GitHub
Connecting a GitHub repository to Render
Configuring a web service deployment
Deploying a new Render web service
Note: This tutorial requires access to a GitHub account and assumes familiarity with using GitHub. If you are unfamiliar with GitHub or need help setting up an account, we recommend visiting the Learn GitHub: Introduction course first.

Let’s get started!

Forking a Sample Render Application
To get started with deploying with Render, we will first need an application. We can use an existing application we have written previously or one provided by Render. Render provides a few different sample applications that span a variety of popular languages and frameworks. These applications are hosted on GitHub that can be used for quickly setting up, configuring, and testing the deployment process.

For the purposes of this tutorial, we will be using the express-hello-world sample application, which is a simple web application built with Node.js and Express.js. While knowing Node.js or Express.js may help and provide context, it is not necessary to have prior experience with either. The full application code is provided by the Render team and we will be forking the code repository. To fork the repository, click the “Fork” button on the top-right corner.

Screenshot of Render's sample github repo showing the placement of the fork button, located between the "watch" and "star" buttons

We will need to configure a few settings to fork the repository correctly for this tutorial:

Ensure the GitHub username is correct.
Select a name for the forked repository. The name can also be left as the default, original repository name.
Add an optional description describing what this code repository does. This field can also be left as the default, original repository description.
We are only interested in the code found in the main branch for our application, so leave that checkbox selected.
When completed, the settings should look something like this:

Screenshot of fork settings fields including Owner, repository name, description, and a checkbox to copy the "main" branch only

Once the settings are confirmed, click the “Create fork” button. Then, take a moment to browse the files in the repository. Notice that the repository has a file called app.js, which holds the main HTML and JavaScript code used to display the web application content. Two more files, yarn.lock and package.json can also be found in the repository and are used to build and deploy the application. Don’t worry too much about the files just yet, we will have a chance to explore them once we create more complicated deployments.

Now, with our forked repository, we can start learning how to deploy it using Render!

Deployment with Render
To start the process of deployment, we need to navigate to the Render dashboard (make sure to be logged in to see the dashboard). From the top-right of the menu, we can click the blue, “New +” button to configure our deployment. From the dropdown, select the “Web Service” option to deploy our application to a web server.

Screenshot showing Render's options after clicking the "New +" button, revealing a "Web Service" option
Once a service is selected, we will need to select our method to deploy the web service. In this case we’ll select “Build and deploy from a Git repository”:

Screenshot showing the two options to “build and deploying from a git repository” or “deploy an existing image from a registry”

Now we will need to connect a GitHub or GitLab account and repository. For this tutorial, we’ll stick with GitHub. The page will look like:

Screenshot displaying the "Create a new Web Service" page that prompts the user to connect to a GitHub or GitLab account

After choosing to connect a GitHub account, we should be able to install Render on our GitHub account for all repositories repository or select specific repositories we want to deploy as a web service. It should look like this:

Screenshot displaying the "Install Render" page that prompts the user to install Render on their personal GitHub account

With Render installed on our GitHub account, we’ll be navigated back to the Render site to choose the repository we would like to connect to.

Screenshot displaying the "Create a new Web Service" page that shows repositories connected to a GitHub account

Select the “Connect” button to give Render permission to access the forked repository from earlier. Once it finishes connecting, we can start configuring the deployment.

Configuring a Web Service
To start, notice that Render has automatically detected the type of code we are using in our application to determine the environment needed for deployment.

Render's message that shows auto detect, alerting the user that it has detected node and autofilled fields accordingly, but reminding users to still check over the values

By detecting what type of application we are deploying, Render is able to pre-populate some of the configuration fields for us. While having these fields pre-populated saves us some time configuring our deployment, we can modify them as needed. Let’s go through the main settings to be aware of:

Name: This field represents the unique name we want for our web service. It is important to note that the name chosen here will also be used to generate the Render-provided URL. So if we select "my-hello-word-app", our application URL will be "my-hello-world-app.onrender.com".

Region: Since Render manages the infrastructure (e.g., memory, storage) and hosting of the server, the service can be hosted in a variety of regions. It is recommended to select a region that is closest to where a majority of the application’s users will be located. For the purposes of the tutorial, we can leave the default region that Render selects for us. However, know that in a production application, the region field is important for determining the latency, i.e. the server’s response time.

Branch: This setting will point to the branch within our forked repository that we want to deploy the code from. Typically, this will be the “main” branch; however, we may want to deploy several instances of your application pointing to different branches. For example, we could have a “test” branch, a “pre-production” branch, and a “production” branch and have three different deployment instances for each.

Root Directory: This optional setting tells Render the repository directory location to run all deployment commands. If this field is left empty, it will default to the root directory of the connected repository.

Runtime: Earlier, we mentioned that Render was able to automatically pre-populate some configuration settings for us by scanning the files in the connected repository. For our sample application, Render has pre-selected Node for the runtime environment. Make sure to double-check that the correct runtime is selected when starting a new project.

Build Command: This setting sets the command Render uses to install libraries or packages needed for the associated application to run. It will use it when it attempts to deploy the application (we will see an example in a bit). For our Node.js Render sample application, and per the instructions of the sample application Readme.md file, we need to use the build command yarn to install our dependencies. Since Render already detected the Node.js application, it has pre-populated the command into the field.

Start Command: Similar to the “Build Command” option, Render also requires a “Start Command” that will run from the “Root Directory” location and starts up all the processes needed to run the application. Since we are creating a web service, this command is used to start the web server. This code is found in app.js. We can also dig into package.json and find the script property and see that start runs the node app.js command, i.e. use Node to execute the app.js file to boot up the server.

Instance Type: This field selects which instance type we will use for the deployment. Render offers a “Free” instance tier which provides sufficient resources for deploying our simple application. Explore the features and limitations of a free instance type in the Render documentation.

Whew! That was a whole lot of settings. Don’t worry, setting up service configurations will become a breeze once we have deployed a few more times. Now that the web service is configured, let’s deploy it!

Note: There is an additional “Advanced Settings” option on the service configuration page that is not covered above.

Multiple choice
Which of the following web service configuration settings tells Render which package dependencies to install in order for the application to build and deploy successfully?


Region


Runtime

(Selected)Correct:
Build Command


Start Command

👏
You got it!
Building and Deploying the Web Service
At the bottom of the web service configuration page, there will be a blue “Create Web Service” button. Click this to start building and deploying your application.

Screenshot showing where the "Create Web Service" Button is, under the "Advanced" dropdown

We will then be redirected to a different page, the web service dashboard page, that will have a console window that will show the initial build steps using the configuration settings we supplied. Take a look at the console and observe the steps it takes. It will look similar to this:

Screenshot of Render's provided terminal that shows lines of output, the last one being "Example app listening on port 10000, indicating that the deploy was successful

To summarize, Render will attempt to deploy by performing the following operations:

First, Render will clone the GitHub repo and check out the branch specified in the configuration. In this case, notice it is the “main” branch.
Next, Render will build the application using the command specified in the configuration. In this case, notice it says it is building via the “yarn” command. This build step may do several operations like validate, fetch, and build packages.
Next, under the hood, Render uses containerization technology to spin up a cloud-based infrastructure for your web app.
Lastly, once Render is done deploying the application, it will start the web service. In this case, notice it runs the node app.js command.
We can confirm that the application is running by verifying the green “Live” state above the console window.

Screenshot of the live state, located above the app's log/terminal

With our application now deployed and running, we can try accessing the application Render-provided URL at the top left.

Screenshot showing where the Render URL is located, in a container that shows the Web Service's metadata

Clicking this link should open a new browser window where our application will be running!

Screenshot of the working app that displays a message "Hello from Render" with confetti

Congratulations! We’ve just successfully deployed our first application using Render!

Wrap Up
As we’ve seen, Render’s intuitive interface and sample pre-made applications make it an excellent choice for quick application deployment. To recap, in this article, we covered how to do the following:

Fork a sample Render code repository in GitHub
Connect a code repository in Render to create a web service
Configure the Render settings to deploy a web service
Deploy a new Render web service
Now that we have completed a full web service deployment, continue exploring Render and take advantage of its powerful features to practice deploying more existing or new applications!