Client-Side Rendering
Client-side rendering has become a popular method for delivering highly interactive web applications. Let’s take a closer look at what client-side rendering is and how it works.

In client-side rendering, the server sends the browser a boilerplate HTML document that includes a reference to a JavaScript file. This JavaScript code is responsible for dynamically generating content in the browser, as the user moves through the site. With client-side rendering, content is generated and rendered as needed; only the requested content will be loaded, at the time it is requested.

In terms of user experience, the initial page load can be slow, since the JavaScript first has to generate the content for a given view before it is visible and interactable. As the user navigates the app, however, JavaScript code will produce content directly in the browser. Since round-trip calls to the server are not necessary to render additional content, subsequent loads will be much faster. Because of its quick rendering time after the initial load, client-side rendering tends to be preferred for highly interactive web applications.

Front-End frameworks like React, Vue, and Angular often rely on client-side rendering to deliver Single Page Applications.

When deciding whether client-side rendering is right for your app, consider the following pros and cons:

Pros:

Fast speed after initial page load.
Cons:

Poor Search Engine Optimization (SEO) performance with dynamically generated content.
Can lead to poor user experience on slower devices.

When is client-side rendering preferred and why?
    Client-side rendering is preferred for highly interactive web applications because of its quick rendering time after the initial page load.

What are the pros and cons of client-side rendering?
    The main advantage of client-side rendering is the fast speed, after the initial page load. The biggest disadvantages are poor SEO performance and the possibility of poor user experience on slower devices.
