What is Infrastructure/Traditional Infrastructure?
In this article, we’ll begin to explore the infrastructure that modern web services are built on.

Using a web application often feels like magic. We click a link, and our browser becomes populated with a website. Yet this data had to go through wires, servers, perhaps even oceans before making it to our screen. When something goes wrong on this journey, web pages become slow or unresponsive. The feeling of magic can turn to frustration.

The outcome of user experience — magic or frustration — often comes down to infrastructure. In this article, we’ll introduce traditional infrastructure, problems that arise, and the role of Operations teams.

What is Infrastructure?
Infrastructure is the hardware and software used to develop, test, and deploy applications. Examples of hardware components include computers, routers, switches, data centers, and cables. Software components include operating systems and web server applications.

image of various pieces of hardware connected with lines in a network/on a map. (Laptops, servers, data centers, smartphones, cloud)

Infrastructure components seek to:

Prevent disruptions to web services that are costly to the business.

Reduce delays in the flow of data, which can affect user experience.

Protect sensitive consumer and business data from cyber-attacks.

In practice, these goals are challenging to achieve. Let’s explore why.

Problems with Traditional Infrastructure
Historically, businesses managed their infrastructure on company premises with their staff. Due to the complexity of infrastructure components and how they interact, this is can be a tall order. Some of the problems that companies run into when managing their infrastructure include:

Hardware components such as power supplies, hard drives, and RAM fail over time.

Malicious users attempt to disrupt web services and steal sensitive data.

Software becomes outdated, requiring consistent patches and upgrades.

Differences in development environments can lead to bugs.

Taking full advantage of the computing resources of each machine.

Getting ahead of these problems comes with some costs: staff hours, equipment purchases, and power. Moving to a cloud-based infrastructure mitigates many of these challenges. We’ll explore this trend when we learn about different types of infrastructure.

So who makes these decisions and handles these issues?

The Role of the Operations Team
The Operations team’s primary responsibility is managing the business application infrastructure. This role has a massive impact on user experience and the success of the business. There are dozens of tasks that fall under this responsibility, including:

Installing and replacing physical components such as servers, switches, hard drives.

Performing software/firmware upgrades such as security patches.

Configuring infrastructure such as firewalls, user access, and ports.

Monitoring network health and alerting personnel when issues arise.

A vast amount of responsibility falls onto the Operations team. In a DevOps culture, Development and Operations members share some of these responsibilities.

Review
In this article, we covered the fundamentals of infrastructure, including:

What infrastructure is and what its goals are

Some problems faced by traditional infrastructure

What the role of the Operations team is

In the coming articles, we’ll move beyond the fundamentals. We will explore the various development environments, the types of infrastructure, infrastructure configuration, and application architectures.