Question 1
Fill in the blanks below.
    In IaC configuration files, the declarative approach simply describes the desired state of infrastructure, while the imperative approach lists the exact steps needed to achieve a desired state. 

Question 2
Match the following benefits to the correct infrastructure configuration methodology.
    Infrastructure as Code: 
    - More consistent configurations
    - More cost effective

    Manual infrastructure configuration: 
    - Decreased reliance on tools
    - Most flexible

Question 3
Fill in the blanks.
    In software development, an environment is the subset of infrastructure resources used to execute a program under specific constraints.

Question 4
Match the following types of infrastructure to the correct descriptions.
    In-house infrastructure: This type of infrastructure involves storing and maintaining servers on company premises. 

    Cloud-based infrastructure: This type of infrastructure involves making computing resources available over the internet. 

    Serverless infrastructure: In this type of infrastructure, the provisioning and configuration of servers is invisible to the team developing the application.

Question 5
Fill in the blanks below.
    In web development, infrastructure is the set of hardware and software components on which web applications are developed, tested and deployed. Traditionally, it has been managed by a company’s operations team. 

Question 6
Fill in the blanks below.
    Acquiring and setting up a server is an example of infrastructure provisioning, while updating application dependencies is an example of infrastructure configuration.

Question 7
Complete the sentences below.
    Infrastructure as Code (IAC) seeks to automate provisioning and configuration as much as possible. Configuration files should be checked into version-control, then tested for validity. These configuration files will be the source of truth for our infrastructure state.

Question 8
Match each environment to its definition.
    Testing environment: This is an environment where test cases are executed against the application as a whole.

    Production environment: This is the environment on which the live application runs and is exposed to real users. 

    Staging environment: This environment mirrors production as closely as possible for final testing. 

    Development environment: This is a local environment where a developer makes changes to code. 

    Integration environment: This is an environment where features are merged into a unified codebase.

Question 9
Match the following application architectures to the correct descriptions.
    N-tier architecture: This type of application is split across several layers which each run on their own server. The layers can grow quite large.  

    Microservices architecture: This type of application distributes small components of business logic into their own services. 

    Monolithic architecture: This type of application lives in a single codebase and is deployed as a single service. 

Question 10
    What is the key difference between a virtual machine and a container?
    A virtual machine requires its own operating system while a container shares the operating system of the underlying host. The fact that containers share an underlying operating system is what makes them smaller and faster to create than virtual machines.